---
layout: laundry-room
---

# Introduction

This page contains information meant to be of use for preparing a suitable
estimate for the Sharon Street Laundry Room and Water Heater project. The scope
of this project includes:

- Replace #38 water heater with a tankless unit on the roof

- Replace #38A water heater with a tankless unit on the roof

- Replace #40 water heater with a conventional unit in the ground-floor laundry
  room

- Demolish existing chimney

- Gut and remodel the ground-floor common laundry room to be a quality interior
  space with utilities concealed in the walls and ceiling (to the extent
  possible).

The following sections provide an orientation around the building, details
related to the units whose water heaters will be moved and who will be affected
by the demolition of the chimney, details regarding the laundry room, and
finally a check list of requirements that we expect to achieve.

# Orientation

The building has 5 units arranged in a "U" shaped footprint. The following
photo is a rough schematic of the showing the three affected floors. The
existing chimney is shown in red, and existing water heaters are shown in
green.

![site plan](/images/laundry-room/site-plan.jpg)

Note the location of the gas meters on the ground floor underneath the
staircases. This is a picture of one set of the meters:

![meters](/images/laundry-room/meters.jpg)

The gas lines leave these meters and travel through the garage along the
ceiling of the ground floor. The following photo shows the path:

![garage](/images/laundry-room/garage.jpg)

After traversing the garage, the gas lines turn towards the center of the
building, emerge in the center of the "U", and travel up the side of the
building as shown in the following photo:

![utilities traveling up the U](/images/laundry-room/up-the-u.jpg)

As you can see, the existing gas lines and some water lines serving the
top-floor units are exposed here. This surface can be accessed using a long
extension ladder, or perhaps a scaffold if necessary.

# Unit #38 Details

Unit #38 is the top-floor unit towards the front of the building. It is served
by a 3/4" gas line feeding a small water heater and a gas range. The water
heater is currently located along the exterior wall of the kitchen. The
objective in this unit is to replace this water heater with a suitable tankless
unit on the roof. The following photo shows the existing water heater:

![#38 Water Heater](/images/laundry-room/38-existing-water-heater-01.jpg)

# Unit #38A Details

Unit #38A is the top-floor unit towards the rear of the building. It is served
by a 1" gas line feeding a water heater and a gas range. Note also that it has
a 1/2" stub to which a heater may be attached in the future. The water heater
is located in a closet adjacent to the brick chimney as shown in the following
image:

![#38A Water Heater](/images/laundry-room/38a-existing-water-heater.jpg)

The objective in this unit is to replace the water heater with a suitable
tankless unit on the roof, and to demolish the chimney.

# Unit #40 Details

Unit #40 is the first-floor full flat. It is served by a 3/4" gas line feeding
a water heater and a gas range. Note that it also has a 1/2" stub to which a
heater may be attached in the future. The water heater is located in the
kitchen adjacent to the brick chimney (photo forthcoming). The objective in
this unit is to replace the water heater with a conventional unit located on
the ground floor in the laundry room, and to demolish the chimney.

# Roof Details

The following image shows the roof:

![Roof](/images/laundry-room/roof.jpg)

The new water heaters for #38 and #38A should be located on the right side of
this image. Any mounting structure and/or shed required to house the water
heaters must be adequately weather proofed, must not introduce any leaks in
roof, and must be installed in such a way that standing rain water does not
accumulate.

Note that the chimney does not appear to vent through the roof on the affected
side of the building! This is a mystery.

# Laundry Room Details

## Existing Laundry Room

The existing laundry room has a small interior room, a washer, a dryer, and a
water heater. Currently, the water heater only serves the washer. These are
shown in the following simple floor plan:

![existing floor plan](/images/laundry-room/existing-floorplan.jpg)

Other details to note here are the two doorways at the top right and bottom
right of the image, the existing window in the top left of the image, the
existing electrical equipment in the bottom left of the image, and the existing
brick chimney at the bottom center. Also note the concrete foundation along the
right-hand side of the image.

The following photo shows the existing washer, dryer, and water heater. As you
can see, the existing plumbing, electrical, and ventilation are mounted to the
wall surfaces. We hope to move all of this equipment into the walls and ceiling
where possible.

![Washer and Dryer](/images/laundry-room/washer-dryer.jpg)

The following photo shows the exising window. Its frame is far from square and
it has a terrible gap at the top. We wish to replace this window with a
suitable non-operable window.

![Window](/images/laundry-room/window.jpg)

The photo below shows the window from the exterior. It also shows the
electrical boxes and cold water source lines.

![Window Electrical Exterior](/images/laundry-room/window-electrical-exterior.jpg)

This photo shows the existing electrical equipment, which includes the main
feeders for the whole building. We wish to achieve the highest quality finish
around this equipment, which may involve preserving the drywall as opposed to
replacing it. I am assuming that we cannot bury this equipment behind a false
wall.

![Electrical Equipment](/images/laundry-room/electrical.jpg)

The above image also shows the brick chimney, which is to be demolished.

This photo shows the laundry room entry. Note the deteriorated carpet, which
will be replaced with ceramic tile. The tile should be a single light color,
and no smaller than 10" square. We expect the tile work to be
professional. Specifically, the floor should be neatly finished around the
edges and at the door threshold. It should also remain free of cracks, loose
tiles, and loose grout for many years. Within these parameters, we prefer
options that make the project cheaper.

![Laundry Room Entry](/images/laundry-room/laundry-entry.jpg)

The photo also shows the deteriorated entry door, which should be replaced by a
solid door of reasonable quality with a quality knob witha silver finish that
does not lock. The door should also have a neatly incorporated threshold.

## Proposed Laundry Room

Our hope is to transform this laundry room into a quality interior space with
the following floorplan:

![future floor plan](/images/laundry-room/future-floorplan.jpg)

The wall behind the sink, washer, and dryer will contain ample plumbing and
electrical. It may be necessary to build a false wall to hide this plumbing.

The new sink should be a stand-alone stainless steel unit with a
drainboard. Something like [this unit from global
industrial](http://www.globalindustrial.com/p/plumbing/sinks/1-compartment/nsf-fabricated-1-compartment-sink-18l-x-18w-bowl-812-splash-18h-left-drainboard-16ga),
also shown here:

![sink](/images/laundry-room/sink.jpg)

There are two banks of cabinetry. The ones on the right side of the image are
arranged in a two-by-three grid. They should be 20" wide, 36" high, and the
standard 12" deep. The will probably have to be mounted on a false wall of some
sort to accommodate the concrete foundation. The cabinets should stand off the
floor with a typical toe kick.

The cabinets shown at the bottom of the image are 24"x24" pantry cabinets. They
should be as tall as possible (probably 84").

Cabinetry should be of reasonable quality. MDF and particle board are
acceptable. White thermofoil finish with basic hardware is acceptable. I expect
that inexpensive manufactured options should exist, and that expensive custom
cabinetry will not be required.

Where not obscured by the cabinets, the foundation ledge must be enclosed in a
simple shelf similar to the existing shelf.

Note the proposed location of the existing laundry room water heater and the
new water heater for #40. I expect that the ventilation for these units can
travel through the cavity between the joists in the ceiling above to the
exterior wall. I also expect that the gas and water lines can be concealed in
the ceiling.

The new laundry room should have two simple surface mount light fixtures
operated by a single switch near the door. Something like [this unit from
overstock.com](http://www.overstock.com/Home-Garden/Transitional-1-Light-Brushed-Nickel-Flush-Fixture/7080423/product.html)
would be fine.

![Light](/images/laundry-room/light.jpg)

Electrical outlets should be provided as required by code.

The new laundry room should have simple wood baseboard throughout, and simple
trim around the new door and new window. Something without any miters or detail
like the following would be fine:

![Trim](/images/laundry-room/trim.jpg)

The whole interior, including baseboard and trim, should be painted with Kelly
Moore Swiss Coffee semi-gloss.

# Bid Requirements

The following checklist summarizes our expectations regarding this project:

## Administrative Requirements

Costs for the following items must be specified separately so that we, the
clients, can evaluate the individual contributions of the owners.

- Cost to replace #38 water heater with tankless unit on roof

- Cost to replace #38A water heater with tankless unit on roof

- Cost to replace #40 water heater with conventional unit in laundry room

- Chimney Demolition, including any costs associated with filling the cavities
  and scars up to the subfloor and unadorned/unpainted ceiling/wall surfaces.

- Remodel laundry room.

## Top-Floor water heater requirements

- Build suitable mounting structure/shed on roof

- Source and install tankless water heater for two top-floor units. Be sure to
  include cost of upgrading gas lines as necessary.

- Remove existing water heaters from kitchens

## #40 water heater 

- Source and install conventional water heater

- Remove existing water heater from kitchen

## Laundry Room Requirements

- Demolish interior of exising laundry room down to the studs and remove debris

- New drywall (probably 5/8" per code) throughout

- New ceramic tile throughout

- New solid door with quality knob and threshold

- Fill existing garage entrance, finishing with plywood on the garage side

- Build false wall behind sink and laundry machines to hide plumbing

- Source and install new stand-alone stainless steel sink

- Source and install six 20"wx36"hx12"d cabinets and two 24"wx84"hx24"d
  cabinets.

- Relocate laundry room water heater

- Install new water heater for #40

- Source and install two inexpensive surface-mount light fixtures controlled by
  a single switch near the door

- Install electrical outlets as required per code

- Install simple window trim, door trim, and baseboard trim

- Paint two coats of a single color on entire interior

## General Requirements

- Obsolete equipment mounted to the exterior of the building (e.g., old water
  heater flues, decommissioned gas lines, etc.) should be eliminated.

- Any openings in the building from old equipment, new equipment, nails,
  screws, etc., must be patched, sealed against weather, and primed.

- Areas within the dwelling units will clearly be altered by the relocation of
  the water heaters and the demolition of the chimney. These areas must be
  finished to an unadorned subfloor or drywall as appropriate. Any work beyond
  this (e.g., ceramic tile, trim carpentry, paint, cabinets, etc.) will be left
  to the individual owners.

- Work must be warranted for one year against defects in workmanship including
  but not limited to plumbing leaks, unreasonably frequent water heater resets
  or shutdowns, cracked ceramic tiles, cracks in drywall work, weather proofing
  failures, etc. The expectation is that if such defects occur, the contractor
  will promptly return at his/her own expense and repair the defect.

- The contractor must acquire all the necessary permits from the city, and the
  bid should include any anticipated permit costs.
