---
layout: post
title:  "Document Early, Document Often"
extra_css:
  - /css/dev-doc.css
---

A friend of mine has recently found himself presiding over his company's core
business system. The system has the usually webby things like servers running
back-end processes connected to databases interacting over the Internet with
users through web browsers. A kinda flakey but critical part-time contributor
is the sole developer and maintainer of the system, and the system is pretty
much entirely undocumented. This leads to a pretty big [bus factor
liability](http://reportsyouneed.com/bus-proof/), not to mention an obstacle to
scaling the development team, coherently adding new capabilities to the system,
testing the system, delegating ownership, etc., etc.

This is a pretty common state of affairs in software land (and plenty of other
places too, I'm sure). It's a tough spot to escape from too. One structural
reason is that by the time the lack of documentation is recognized as a
problem, the person who needs it is desperate and the person who is capable of
providing it is unmotivated, leaving, or gone. Even if the capable person is
present and motivated, an ex post facto request for documentation is often met
with an incomplete transcription of thoughts.

Writing documentation happens to be one of those tasks that resonates with my
special brand of OCD. So I've prepared this article to help developers improve
their documentation habits, and managers clearly specify documentation tasks.

# Documentation Types

There are many types of documentation. Duh. But naming these things, and
(perhaps more importantnly) using the names helps establish a culture of
documentation. Also, if you are asking somebody to write documentation, you'll
be more satisfied with the output if you can concisely specify what the
document should contain and how it will be used.

**Folklore**: Okay, this one is really anti-documentation. But it is real. Much
written documentation starts out as folklore, transmitted between contributors
verbally or in front of an ephemeral white board. For largely undocumented
systems or projects, it's all you have.  So explicitly regarding it as stage of
documentation is a helpful notion.

**Notes**: Notes are a sort of stream of consciousness of the note taker. Like
folklore, they often form the exploratory primordial ooze from which other
documents are created. But they are generally quite raw and only decipherable
to the note taker. As such, they should be kept in the private space of the
note taker. If notes appear in a wiki or other documentation system that is
searchable by the entire organization, they qualify as cruft and should either
be formalized into some other kind of document or deleted.

**Annotated Diagram**: This is a high-level conceptual diagram of a system. It
shows how components are meant to work together. This type of document is very
useful to orient new contributors with a big-picture view of what's going
on. So if I'm expecting a new contributor to join a project and there is no
annotated diagram, I prepare one right away. I do the same thing when I join a
new project and no such diagram exists. Annotated diagrams also make useful
centerpieces for system design discussions, and for delegating ownership of
components. Here are a couple examples:

<a href="/images/dev-doc/diagram-01.jpg" target="_blank"><img src="/images/dev-doc/diagram-01.jpg" class="side-by-side" alt="Example Diagram 1"></a>
<a href="/images/dev-doc/diagram-02.jpg" target="_blank"><img src="/images/dev-doc/diagram-02.jpg" class="side-by-side" alt="Example Diagram 2"></a>
<a href="http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/w/images/1/15/OSM_Components.png" target="_blank"><img src="http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/w/images/1/15/OSM_Components.png" class="side-by-side" alt="Open Street Map Components"></a>

NOTE: That [beautiful OSM
image](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/File:OSM_Components.png) is shared
under the [CC-BY-SA](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/).

As you can see from the examples, I generally prefer to draw diagrams quickly
on a whiteboard, then photograph them and integrate them into a document. If
they must be updated, re-drawing them is generally not very arduous. Also,
getting buy-in from developers on using the white board is pretty easy. When I
need something more vectory or professional, I use
[inkscape](http://www.inkscape.org) or [balsamiq](http://balsamiq.com/), but
only after first sketching on the whiteboard.

Annotated diagrams are also very useful for describing software stacks, network
stacks, state machines, data processing pipelines, etc. Depending on what the
diagram is depicting, the document may belong in a wiki, a blog, or possibly
checked-in to version control alongside the code that implements the components
described by the diagram. Keep in mind that the diagrams are not stand-alone
documents. They must be accompanied by some annotations. Here are some useful
ideas for things to annotate:

- What are the hostnames of the computers running these services, and how do I
  login?

- Which ports are the services running on?

- Where is the source code and documentation for each service?

- Which components are external 3rd-party services (e.g., web APIs), and how
  are they managed?

- Are any of these services run on timers (e.g., cron jobs)?

- Where do the logs appear for the services?

**Recipe**: The recipe is the unsung missing link of documentation. It is a
concise and rigorous list of steps meant to be executed in order by the reader
to complete a well-understood task. Examples include setting up a development
environment, preparing a release from source code, deploying a production or
staging system from scratch, restoring a system from backup, etc. Recipes are a
very important first step towards automating existing processes. Accordingly,
they may start out as a long list of manual steps, and become shorter and
shorter over time as you cram steps into scripts. The best time to write down a
recipe is as you execute it, usually on a staging system. I usually prepare my
first draft recipes in my own notes, then clean them up and put them on a wiki
or in a README file. Thereafter, it can be executed, improved, debugged,
expanded, or contracted (e.g., automated) by other collaborators.

Here is a simple mock example that I've prepared:

0. Retrieve dev ops scripts

    ```bash
    git clone ssh://mygitserver.com/devops.git/
    cd devops
    ```

    If you need credentials to fetch this stuff, ask Joe.

1. Set some relevant environment variables:

    ```bash
    export PATH=$PWD/bin:$PATH
    export VIRTUALIZATION_API_KEY=<yourkeyhere>
    export ENVIRONMENT=production
    export DATABASE=foo-db-v2-prod
    export APP=foo-app-v3-prod
    ```

    Everyone uses their own `VIRTUALIZATION_API_KEY`. If you don't have one,
    see Joe.

2. Launch new machines:

    ```bash
    launch.sh $DATABASE $APP
    ```

    Expect the script to succeed after about a minute. 

Now, let me point out some important features about this example and recipes in
general:

- Each step starts with a verb.

- Each step contains commands that can be executed on the command line. The
  command line is nice because it is terse and easy to update.

- For steps whose output is not obvious, tell the user what to _expect_.

- Note that this recipe is probably useful, but not complete. What happens
  after step 2? Probably some sort of automated and/or human interactive QA
  testing should be performed. Then maybe there are other steps to actually
  deploy the new machines to production. Each time you run the recipe, be
  prepared to edit it, add new steps, etc.

**API Documentation**: API documentation saves the users of your API from
having to read your code (or your mind) to figure out how things work.  When
I'm bringing my A game, I always write the documentation before writing
production code. This goes for web APIs and library APIs. Writing the
documentation before you write the code forces you to work out a lot of
important details that you weren't thinking about with your pals at the
whiteboard. And once the documentation is written, the code often writes
itself. Better yet, the functional tests write themselves. Also, if you write
the documentation first, your users may have an opportunity to review it and
comment before you build it, when it is still easy to make changes.

Where you capture your API documentation depends on what you're
documenting. Here are some pointers:

- Keep the documentation close to the code. This way, if a developer changes
  some behavior, s/he can easily change the documentation.

- Document library functions and data structures inline. You should probably
  take the time to learn the
  [docstring](http://legacy.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0257/),
  [javadoc](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/documentation/index-137868.html),
  or whateverdoc best practices for your environment.

- You do not have to document every function. In fact, as a practice, I rarely
  document any functions and data structures that do not make up the
  API. Instead, I prefer to write short, well named functions. One major
  exception to this is writing comments when the code does not explain itself.

- For Web APIs, I've started writing [swagger
  JSON](https://github.com/wordnik/swagger-spec/). That said, so far I've
  abandoned three attempts to extract swagger documentation from deep in the
  source code. Instead, I prefer to keep the documentation consolidated and
  near the source code. One benefit of this is that a contributor not
  intimately familiar with the source code can effectively edit it. Another is
  that I use the documentation to scaffold the code, not the other way around.

There are many many other types of documentation. I'm itching to write a blurb
for release notes, road maps, release tasks, data logs, data documentation (or
metadata), etc. Perhaps I'll return later to fill some of these out.

# Tips

I'll close here with a few general tips:

- Always be documenting.

- Search before you start a new document. Your peers or predecessors may have
  started something, and you're always better off deleting or improving what
  they've done so that future readers don't have to go on a forensic mission to
  determine which document is authoritative or most up to date.

- Minimize the number of documentation repositories. Some organizations have
  many different places for documentation. One group uses google docs for this,
  then there's the corporate wiki, and the developer wiki, each source code
  repository has a README file, etc. If you have just a few standard places to
  look for documentation, it's easier to search first and prevent cruft and
  confusion.

- Promote your documentation. If you've prepared some documentation, announce
  it to contributors and users. Hopefully you'll find that your documentation
  is useful.